# Janex File Format

The Janex format is a modern executable packaging format for Java programs.

Each Janex file contains the following:

1. A set of classpath and module-path entries. Entries are divided into local entries and remote entries. Local entries
   are a group of class files and resource files packaged within the Janex file, while remote entries are Maven GAV
   coordinates that are resolved and downloaded by the Janex tool at runtime.
2. A set of boot metadata, which includes information such as the required Java version and JVM arguments for the
   program. The Janex tool selects an appropriate Java runtime environment based on this information and starts the
   program with the necessary JVM arguments.

When launching a Janex program, the **Janex Launcher** reads the launcher metadata to find a suitable Java runtime based
on the metadata,
acquires appropriate JVM arguments according to the conditions, and starts a Java process using these JVM arguments.

In the Java process, Janex needs to load a **Janex Boot** provided as a JAR, which provides a custom ClassLoader for
`Janex` to load classes from the Janex file.

## Data Types

### Basic Data Types

Janex uses little-endian encoding for all integer and floating-point numbers.

This document uses `u8`/`u16`/`u32`/`u64` to represent 8/16/32/64-bit unsigned integers,
uses `i8`/`i16`/`i32`/`i64` to represent 8/16/32/64-bit signed integers,
and uses `f32`/`f64` to represent 32/64-bit floating-point numbers.

`byte` represents 8-bit opaque data.

### Complex Data Types

This document uses pseudo-code similar to Rust structs to represent complex data types. For example:

```rust
struct MyStruct {
    length: u32,
    data: [u8; length],
}
```

Here, `length` is a 32-bit unsigned integer, and `data` is a byte array of length `length`.

`List<T>` represents a variable-length list, where `T` is the type of elements in the list.
The `T` type must define a special value to indicate the end of the list, and this value cannot appear in the list.

### Compress

Janex uses the following enum to record the compression method to be used:

```rust
#[repr(u8)]
enum CompressMethod {
    NONE = 0,
    CLASSFILE = 1,
    ZSTD = 2,
}
```

Where:

- `NONE`: No compression;
- `CLASSFILE`: A compression algorithm developed specifically for class files, which uses a shared string pool and
  Zstandard compression algorithm for compression;
- `ZSTD`: Zstandard compression.

We use this structure to represent compressed data:

```rust
struct CompressedData<T, CM: CompressMethod, CS: usize> {
}
```

Where:

- `T`: The type of data to be compressed;
- `CM`: The compression method to be used;
- `CS`: The compressed size of the data.

## Janex File Structure

The Janex file is the format for executable files generated by the Janex tool. Its overall structure is as follows:

```rust
struct JanexFile {
    magic_number: u64, // 0x0000_0058_454e_414a ("JANEX\0\0\0")
    data_pool: [byte; ...],
    boot_metadata: BootMetadata,
    launcher_metadata: LauncherMetadata,
    file_end: FileEnd,
}
```

Where:

- `magic_number`: Used to identify the start of the file and for verification, with a value of `0x0000_0058_454e_414a` (
  i.e., the string `"JANEX\0\0\0"`);
- `data_pool`: Data pool used to store all information such as class files and resource files, its structure is shown
  below;
- `boot_metadata`: Boot metadata used to describe the classes and modules that need to be loaded at startup, its
  structure is shown below;
- `launcher_metadata`: Launcher metadata used to describe the configuration information of the launcher, its structure
  is shown below;
- `file_end`: File end metadata used to describe the size, offset, etc. of the file, its structure is shown below.

### `FileEnd` Structure

The Janex file is designed to allow arbitrary custom data to be attached at the head of the file (e.g., executable files
like PE/ELF, shell scripts, etc.),
so the core metadata of the Janex file is located in the `file_end` field at the end of the file, its structure is as
follows:

```rust
struct FileEnd {
    magic_number:  u64, // 0x0000_0058_454e_414a ("JANEX\0\0\0")
    major_version: u32,
    minor_version: u32,
    flags:         u64,
    file_size:     u64,
    boot_metadata_offset:     u64,
    launcher_metadata_offset: u64,
    reserved: [byte; 32],
}
```

The `FileEnd` structure is a total of 80 bytes.

Where:

- `magic_number`: Used to identify the start of the metadata, with a value of `0x0000_0058_454e_414a` (i.e., the string
  `"JANEX\0\0\0"`);
- `major_version`: The major version number of the Janex file format;
- `minor_version`: The minor version number of the Janex file format;
- `flags`: File flags, currently unused, reserved as `0`;
- `file_size`: The total size of the Janex file (including header and tail), the Janex tool uses it to locate the file
  header;
- `boot_metadata_offset`: The offset of the `boot_metadata` field in the file;
- `launcher_metadata_offset`: The offset of the `launcher_metadata` field in the file;
- `reserved`: Reserved field, currently unused, all bytes are `0`.

### `BootMetadata`

Boot metadata is read by the Janex Boot.

Its structure is as follows:

```rust
struct BootMetadata {
    magic_number: u32, // 0x544f4f42 ("BOOT")
    group_count:  u32,
    string_pool:  StringPool,
    groups: [ResourceGroup; group_count],
}
```

Where:

- `magic_number`: Used to identify the start of the metadata, with a value of `0x544f4f42` (i.e., the string `"BOOT"`);
- `group_count`: Number of groups;
- `string_pool`: String pool used to store string data, its structure is shown below;
- `groups`: An array of groups, each describing a module or class.

#### `StringPool`

The `StringPool` structure is as follows:

```rust
struct StringPool {
    magic_number:    u8, // 0xf0
    compress_method: CompressMethod,
    reserved:        u16,
    count:           u32,
    uncompressed_bytes_size: u32,
    compressed_bytes_size:  u32,
    sizes: [u16; count],
    compressed_bytes: CompressedData<byte, compress_method, compressed_bytes_size:>,
}
```

Where:

- `magic_number`: Used to identify the start of the string pool;
- `compress_method`: Compression method used to compress the string pool;
- `reserved`: Reserved field, currently unused;
- `count`: Number of strings in the string pool;
- `uncompressed_bytes_size`: Total size of the uncompressed string pool data;
- `compressed_bytes_size`: Total size of the compressed string pool data;
- `sizes`: An array of string sizes.
- `compressed_bytes`: Compressed string pool data.

#### `ResourceGroup`

`ResourceGroup` is a group of metadata of class files or resource files.

```rust
struct ResourceGroup {
    magic_number:    u8, // 0xeb
    compress_method: CompressMethod,
    reserved:        [byte; 48],

    uncompressed_size: u64,
    compressed_size:   u64,
    resources_count:   u64,
    checksum:          u64,

    compressed_resources: CompressedData<[Resource; resources_count], compress_method, compressed_size>,
}
```

Where:

- `magic_number`: Used to identify the start of the resource group;
- `compress_method`: Compression method used to compress the resource group;
- `reserved`: Reserved field, currently unused;
- `uncompressed_size`: Total size of the uncompressed resource group data;
- `compressed_size`: Total size of the compressed resource group data;
- `resources_count`: Number of resources in the resource group;
- `checksum`: XXH64 checksum of the resource group;
- `compressed_resources`: Compressed resource data. 

#### `Resource`

`Resource` is used to represent a class file or resource file. `Resource` only contains metadata, and the actual file content is in `data_pool`.

```rust
struct Resource {
    magic_number: u8, // 0x1b
    compress_method: CompressMethod,
    path_length: u16,
    reserved: [byte; 4],
    uncompressed_size: u64,
    compressed_size: u64,
    content_offset: u64,
    path: [byte; path_length], // UTF-8
    optional_fields: List<ResourceField>,
}
```

Where:

- `magic_number`: Used to identify the start of the resource;
- `compress_method`: Compression method used to compress the resource body;
- `path_length`: Length of the resource path;
- `reserved`: Reserved field, currently unused;
- `uncompressed_size`: Size of the uncompressed resource;
- `compressed_size`: Size of the compressed resource;
- `content_offset`: Offset of the resource content in `data_pool`;
- `path`: Resource path;
- `optional_fields`: Optional fields of the resource;

#### `ResourceField`

The supported optional fields of a resource are:

```rust
enum ResourceField {
    /// Resource list end marker.
    End {
        id: u8, // 0x00
    },
    
    /// XXH64 checksum of the resource body.
    Checksum {
        id: u8, // 0x01
        checksum: u64,
    },
    
    /// File creation time.
    FileCreateTime {
        id: u8, // 0x02
        
        /// File create time epoch in milliseconds.
        timestamp: u64,
    },
    
    /// File modification time.
    FileModifyTime {
        id: u8, // 0x03
        
        /// File modify time epoch in milliseconds.
        timestamp: u64,
    },
    
    /// File access time.
    FileAccessTime {
        id: u8, // 0x04
        
        /// File access time epoch in milliseconds.
        timestamp: u64,
    },
}
```